README.md, before:

![Lint & Test](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/workflows/Lint%20&%20Test/badge.svg)
![Docker Build](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/workflows/Docker%20Build/badge.svg)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/blackbox-cli.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/blackbox-cli/)

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_banner.png)

A simple service which magically backs up all your databases to all your
favorite cloud storage providers, and then notifies you.

Simply create a config file, fill in some connection strings for your favorite
services, and schedule `blackbox` to run however often you want using something
like `cron`, or a Kubernetes CronJob.

## Table of Contents

- [Setup](#setup)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Databases](#databases)
    - [MongoDB](#mongodb)
    - [PostgreSQL](#postgresql)
    - [MariaDB](#mariadb)
    - [MySQL](#mysql)
    - [Redis](#redis)
    - [Specify Storage Providers and Notifiers for each Database](#specify-storage-providers-and-notifiers-for-each-database)
- [Storage Providers](#storage-providers)
    - [S3](#s3)
    - [Dropbox](#dropbox)
    - [Google Drive](#google-drive)
- [Notifiers](#notifiers)
    - [Discord](#discord)
    - [Slack](#slack)
    - [Telegram](#telegram)
    - [Json](#json)
- [Rotation](#rotation)
- [Cooldown](#cooldown)

# Setup

This service can either be set up as a cron job (on UNIX systems), as a
Kubernetes CronJob, or scheduled in your favorite alternative scheduler.

## Quick start

Requires Python 3.9 or newer

```sh
# Install the CLI tool
pip install blackbox-cli

# Create a configuration file
blackbox --init

# Run blackbox with a specific config file
blackbox --config=/path/to/blackbox.yaml
```

To run Blackbox manually in the Poetry environment, run:

```
poetry run python -m blackbox
```

### Setting up as a cron job

All you need to do to set it up as a cron job is clone this repo, create a
config file (see below), and trigger `blackbox` to run automatically however
often you want.

```sh
crontab -e

#run backup every hour
0 */1 * * * blackbox --config path/to/blackbox.yml
```

### Setting it up as a Kubernetes CronJob

To set this up as a Kubernetes CronJob, you'll want three manifests and a
secret.

Before we start, you'll probably want to create a secret named `blackbox-secrets` where you expose
environment variables containing stuff like passwords for your databases,
credentials for your storage, and webhooks as environment variables. We'll be
interpolating those into the config file.

Next, we'll need a ConfigMap for the `blackbox.yaml` config file. See the
Configuration section below for more information on what to put inside this
file.

```yaml
# blackbox-configmap.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: blackbox-config
data:
  blackbox.yaml: |
    databases:
      mongodb:
        main_mongodb:
            connection_string: mongodb://{{ MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME }}:{{ MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD }}@mongodb.default.svc.cluster.local:27017

    storage:
      s3:
        main_s3:
          bucket: blackbox
          endpoint: my.s3.com
          aws_access_key_id: {{ AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          aws_secret_access_key: {{ AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}

    notifiers:
      discord:
        main_discord:
          webhook: {{ DISCORD_WEBHOOK }}

    retention_days: 7
```

Finally, we need the CronJob itself. This one is configured to run once a day,
at midnight.

```yaml
# cronjob.yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: CronJob
metadata:
  name: blackbox
spec:
  schedule: "@daily"
  jobTemplate:
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
            - name: blackbox
              image: lemonsaurus/blackbox
              imagePullPolicy: Always
              envFrom:
                - secretRef:
                    name: blackbox-secrets
              # Tell blackbox where to find the config file.
              env:
              - name: BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH
                value: "/blackbox/config_file/blackbox.yaml"
              volumeMounts:
                # Take care not to mount this in the root folder!
                # That will replace everything in the root folder with
                # the contents of this volume, which sucks.
                - mountPath: /blackbox/config_file
                  name: blackbox-config
          volumes:
            - name: blackbox-config
              configMap:
                name: blackbox-config
          restartPolicy: OnFailure
      backoffLimit: 3
```

# Configuration

`blackbox` configuration is easy. You simply create a yaml
file, `blackbox.yaml`, which contains something like this:

See below for specific configuration information for each handler.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres: # Database type 
    main_postgres: # Database identifier
      # Configuration (see below for further information on specific databases)
      username: username
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port

      # Optionally specify storage and notifiers to use
      # You can specify them by type or identifier
      # Use a string for a single specifier, a list for multiple specifiers
      storage_providers:
        - s3
        - secondary_dropbox
      notifiers: slack

  redis:
    main_redis:
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port
      # No specified storage and notifiers, so all storage and notifiers are used

storage:
  s3: # Storage type
    main_s3: # Storage identifier
      bucket: bucket
      endpoint: s3.endpoint.com
    secondary_s3:
      bucket: bucket
      endpoint: s3.another_endpoint.com
  dropbox:
    main_dropbox:
      access_token: XXXXXXXXXXX
    secondary_dropbox:
      access_token: XXXXXXXXXXX

notifiers:
  discord: # Notifier type
    main_discord: # Notifier identifier
      webhook: https://discord.com/api/webhooks/797541821394714674/lzRM9DFggtfHZXGJTz3yE-MrYJ-4O-0AbdQg3uV2x4vFbu7HTHY2Njq8cx8oyMg0T3Wk
  slack:
    main_slack:
      webhook: https://hooks.slack.com/services/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

retention_days: 7
```

Blackbox will look for this file in the root folder by default, however you can
provide an alternative config file path by creating an environment variable
called `BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH`, and set it to the absolute path of the file.

```sh
export BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH=/var/my/favorite/fruit/blackbox.yaml
```

You can also specify the location of this file when using the `blackbox` cli
command.

```sh
blackbox --config=/path/to/blackbox.yaml
```

## Environment Variables

The `blackbox.yaml` will ✨ **magically interpolate** ✨ any environment
variables that exist in the environment where `blackbox` is running. This is
very useful if you want to keep your secrets in environment variables, instead
of keeping them in the config file in plaintext.

#### Example

Imagine your current config looks like this, but you want to move the username
and password into environment variables.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: lemonsaurus
      password: security-is-overrated
      host: localhost
      port: 5432
```

So we'll create two environment variables like these:

```sh
export POSTGRES_USERNAME=lemonsaurus
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=security-is-overrated
```

And now we can make use of these environment variables by using double curly
brackets, like this:

```yaml
databases:
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: { { POSTGRES_USERNAME } }
      password: { { POSTGRES_PASSWORD } }
      host: localhost
      port: 5432
```

## Databases

Right now, this app supports **MongoDB**, **PostgreSQL 7.0 or higher**, **MariaDB**, **Redis** and **local storage archiving**. If
you need support for an additional database, consider opening a pull request to
add a new database handler.

To configure databases, add a section with this format:

```yaml
databases:
  database_type:
    # More than one of each database type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  database_type:
    ...
```

See below for the specific database types available and fields required.
Identifiers can be any string of your choosing.

### MongoDB

- **Database Type**: `mongodb`
- **Required fields**: `connection_string`
- The `connection_string` field is in the
  format `mongodb://username:password@host:port`
- To restore from the backup,
  use `mongorestore --gzip --archive=/path/to/backup.archive`

```yaml
  mongodb:
    main_mongo:
      connection_string: "mongodb://blackbox:blackbox@mongo:27017"
```

### PostgreSQL

- **Database Type**: `postgres`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `psql -f /path/to/backup.sql`

```yaml
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: blackbox
      password: blackbox
      host: postgres
      port: "5432"
```

### MariaDB

- **Database Type**: `mariadb`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `mysql -u <user> -p < db_backup.sql`

```yaml
  mariadb:
    main_mariadb:
      username: root
      password: example
      host: maria
      port: "3306"
```

### MySQL

- **Database Type**: `mysql`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `mysql -u <user> -p < db_backup.sql`

```yaml
  mysql:
    main_mysql:
      username: root
      password: example
      host: mysql
      port: "3306"
```

### Redis

- **Database Type**: `redis`
- **Required fields**: `password`, `host`, `port`

```yaml
  redis:
    main_redis:
      password: blackbox
      host: redis
      port: "6379"
```

### Local storage

- **Database type**: `localstorage`
- **Required field**: `path`
- **Optional field**: `compression_level`
- The compression level must be an integer between 0 and 9.
- The archive will contain the full structure, starting from the root folder.

```yaml
  localstorage:
    main_localstorage:
      path: /path/to/folder
      compression_level: 7
```

#### To restore from the backup

- Stop Redis server.
- Turn off `appendonly` mode in Redis configuration (set to `no`).
- Copy backup file to Redis working directory (`dir` in configuration) with
  name that is defined in configuration key `dbfilename`.
- Set backup permissions.

```
sudo chown redis:redis <path-to-redis-dump-file>
sudo chmod 660 <path-to-redis-dump-file>
```

- Start Redis server.

If you want to re-enable `appendonly`:

- Login with `redis-cli`.
- Run `BGREWRITEAOF`.
- Exit from Redis CLI (with `exit`).
- Stop Redis server.
- Set `appendonly` to `yes` in Redis configuration.
- Start Redis server.

### Specify Storage providers and Notifiers for each Database

To specify specific storage providers or notifiers for databases, add the
fields `storage_providers` and `notifiers` under each database entry. The entry
can be a list or a string.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres: # Database type 
    main_postgres: # Database identifier
      username: username
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port

      storage_providers:
        - s3
        - secondary_dropbox
      notifiers: slack
```

The above example will backup `main_postgres` to every `s3` storage provider
configured, as well as the storage provider with the
identifier `secondary_dropbox`. Then, only the `slack` notifier gets notified.

These fields are optional. If not given, all storage providers and all
notifiers will be used.

## Storage providers

**Blackbox** can work with different storage providers to save your logs and
backups - usually so that you can automatically store them in the cloud. Right
now we support **S3** and **Dropbox**.

To configure storage providers, add a section with this format:

```yaml
storage:
  storage_type:
    # More than one of each storage provider type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  storage_type:
    ...
```

### S3

We support any S3 object storage bucket, whether it's from **AWS**, **Linode**
, **DigitalOcean**, **Scaleway**, or another S3-compatible object storage
provider.

**Blackbox** will respect the `retention_days` configuration setting and delete
older files from the S3 storage. Please note that if you have a bucket
expiration policy on your storage, **blackbox** will not do anything to disable
it. So, for example, if your bucket expiration policy is 12 hours and blackbox
is set to 7 `retention_days`, then your backups are all gonna be deleted after
12 hours unless you disable your policy.

#### S3 configuration

- **Storage Type**: `s3`
- **Required fields**: `bucket`, `endpoint`
- **Optional fields**: `aws_access_key_id`, `aws_secret_access_key`
- The `endpoint` field can look something like
  this: `s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com`

#### Credentials

To upload stuff to S3, you'll need credentials. Your **AWS credentials** can be
provided in several ways. This is the order in which blackbox looks for them:

- First, we look for the optional fields in the s3 configuration,
  called `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key`.
- If these are not found, we'll check if the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
  and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` environment variables are declared in the local
  environment where Blackbox is running.
- If we can't find these, we'll look for an `.aws/config` file in the local
  environment.
- NOTE: If the bucket is public, no credentials are necessary.

### Dropbox

- **Storage Type**: `dropbox`
- **Required fields**: `access_token`
- **Optional fields**: `upload_directory`

The Dropbox storage handler needs a user access token in order to work. To get
one, do the following:

- Create a Dropbox account (if you don't already have one).
- Go to https://dropbox.com/developers
- Create a new application with App Folder access. **Do not give it full
  access**, as this may have dangerous, destructive consequences if configured
  incorrectly.

You can also define a custom location (root is App Folder) using the
`upload_directory` optional parameter. This **should** begin with slash and 
**must** end with slash. Default is root.

### Google Drive

- **Storage Type**: `googledrive`
- **Required fields**: `refresh_token, client_id, client_secret`
- **Optional fields**: `upload_directory`

The Google Drive storage handler needs a refresh token, client ID, and client secret in order to work. To get
these, do the following:

- Create a Google account (if you don't already have one).
- Go to https://console.cloud.google.com
- Create a project
- In the OAuth Overview page, click Get Started
- Follow the prompts and fill out the presented forms
- When you're finished, go to the Clients tab, and click Create Client
- Select Web Application for Application Type
- The required scopes are: `/auth/drive.file` and `/auth/drive.appdata`
- Click your newly created client to view the client ID and secret
- Use your client ID and secret to obtain a refresh token using the tool of your choice, such as Postman
- Make sure you add your own email as a user in the Audience tab

If you decide to use Postman to obtain your refresh token:

- Ensure you set the authorized redirect URI to `https://oauth.pstmn.io/v1/callback` in your Google client configuration
- Set the `Auth URL` to `https://accounts.google.com/o/oauth2/v2/auth?access_type=offline&prompt=consent` in Postman to ensure Google responds with a refresh token, and not only an access token
- Read the [Postman authorization docs](https://learning.postman.com/docs/sending-requests/authorization/authorization/)

You can define a custom location in which to store backups (the default is the root folder) using the
`upload_directory` optional parameter. This should be in the format `Cool/Example`.

## Notifiers

`blackbox` also implements different _notifiers_, which is how it reports the
result of one of its jobs to you. Right now we only support the below listed notifiers, 
but if you need a specific notifier, feel free to open an issue.

To configure notifiers, add a section with this format:

```yaml
notifiers:
  notifier_type:
    # More than one of each notifier type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  notifier_type:
    ...
```

### Discord

- **Notifier Type**: `discord`
- **Required fields**: `webhook`
- The `webhook` field usually looks
  like `https://discord.com/api/webhooks/797541821394714674/lzRM9DFggtfHZXGJTz3yE-MrYJ-4O-0AbdQg3uV2x4vFbu7HTHY2Njq8cx8oyMg0T3Wk`
- We also support `ptb.discord.com` and `canary.discord.com` webhooks.

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_discord.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_discord_2.png)

### Slack

- **Notifier Type**: `slack`
- **Required fields**: `webhook`
- The `webhook` field usually looks
  like `https://hooks.slack.com/services/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX`

Slack notifiers have 2 styles: legacy attachment (default) and modern Block Kit
version. To enable Block Kit version, set the optional field `use_block_kit` to
anything.

Default:

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_default_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_default_fail.png)

Modern:

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_modern_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_modern_fail.png)


### Telegram

- **Notifier Type**: `telegram`
- **Required fields**: `token`, `chat_id`
- YAML will look like this:
```notifiers:
  telegram:
    telegram_1:
      token: {{ TELEGRAM_TOKEN }}
      chat_id: {{ TELEGRAM_CHAT_ID }}
```
- You can create a bot and get a bot token using the `BotFather` account in Telegram. Follow [these instructions](https://core.telegram.org/bots#6-botfather).
- You can find your `chat_id` by using the `userinfobot` account in Telegram. Just `/start` the bot.
- Do not forget to `/start` your own bot to grant sending permissions.

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_telegram_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_telegram_fail.png)


### Json
- **Notifier Type**: `json`
- **Required fields**: `url`
- YAML will look like this:
```notifiers:
  json:
    json_1:
      url: https://mydomain.com/api/blackbox-notifications
```

**Note**: All notifications are sent as a `POST` request because the data will live within the request's body.

The body of the HTTP request will look like this

```json
{
    "backup-data": [
        {
            "source": "main_postgres",
            "success": true,
            "output": "",
            "backup": [
                {
                    "name": "main_dropbox",
                    "success": true
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```


## Rotation

By default, `blackbox` will automatically remove all backup files older than 7
days in the folder you configure for your storage provider. To determine if
something is a backup file or not, it will use a regex pattern that corresponds
with the default file it saves, for
example `blackbox-postgres-backup-11-12-2020.sql`.

You can configure the number of days before rotating by altering
the `retention_days` parameter in `blackbox.yaml`.


## Cooldown

By default, `blackbox` will send all notification at every backup attempt. 
You can specify a `cooldown` period in `blackbox.yaml` during which all notifications will be muted.
This option will not mute failed backups.

### Example usage

```yaml
cooldown: 120s
```
```yaml
cooldown: 3 hours
```
```yaml
cooldown: 2 days 4 hours
```
```yaml
cooldown: 4h 32M 16s
```

Commit message:

Update README to mention folders will be created

README.md, after:

![Lint & Test](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/workflows/Lint%20&%20Test/badge.svg)
![Docker Build](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/workflows/Docker%20Build/badge.svg)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/blackbox-cli.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/blackbox-cli/)

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_banner.png)

A simple service which magically backs up all your databases to all your
favorite cloud storage providers, and then notifies you.

Simply create a config file, fill in some connection strings for your favorite
services, and schedule `blackbox` to run however often you want using something
like `cron`, or a Kubernetes CronJob.

## Table of Contents

- [Setup](#setup)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Databases](#databases)
    - [MongoDB](#mongodb)
    - [PostgreSQL](#postgresql)
    - [MariaDB](#mariadb)
    - [MySQL](#mysql)
    - [Redis](#redis)
    - [Specify Storage Providers and Notifiers for each Database](#specify-storage-providers-and-notifiers-for-each-database)
- [Storage Providers](#storage-providers)
    - [S3](#s3)
    - [Dropbox](#dropbox)
    - [Google Drive](#google-drive)
- [Notifiers](#notifiers)
    - [Discord](#discord)
    - [Slack](#slack)
    - [Telegram](#telegram)
    - [Json](#json)
- [Rotation](#rotation)
- [Cooldown](#cooldown)

# Setup

This service can either be set up as a cron job (on UNIX systems), as a
Kubernetes CronJob, or scheduled in your favorite alternative scheduler.

## Quick start

Requires Python 3.9 or newer

```sh
# Install the CLI tool
pip install blackbox-cli

# Create a configuration file
blackbox --init

# Run blackbox with a specific config file
blackbox --config=/path/to/blackbox.yaml
```

To run Blackbox manually in the Poetry environment, run:

```
poetry run python -m blackbox
```

### Setting up as a cron job

All you need to do to set it up as a cron job is clone this repo, create a
config file (see below), and trigger `blackbox` to run automatically however
often you want.

```sh
crontab -e

#run backup every hour
0 */1 * * * blackbox --config path/to/blackbox.yml
```

### Setting it up as a Kubernetes CronJob

To set this up as a Kubernetes CronJob, you'll want three manifests and a
secret.

Before we start, you'll probably want to create a secret named `blackbox-secrets` where you expose
environment variables containing stuff like passwords for your databases,
credentials for your storage, and webhooks as environment variables. We'll be
interpolating those into the config file.

Next, we'll need a ConfigMap for the `blackbox.yaml` config file. See the
Configuration section below for more information on what to put inside this
file.

```yaml
# blackbox-configmap.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: blackbox-config
data:
  blackbox.yaml: |
    databases:
      mongodb:
        main_mongodb:
            connection_string: mongodb://{{ MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME }}:{{ MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD }}@mongodb.default.svc.cluster.local:27017

    storage:
      s3:
        main_s3:
          bucket: blackbox
          endpoint: my.s3.com
          aws_access_key_id: {{ AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          aws_secret_access_key: {{ AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}

    notifiers:
      discord:
        main_discord:
          webhook: {{ DISCORD_WEBHOOK }}

    retention_days: 7
```

Finally, we need the CronJob itself. This one is configured to run once a day,
at midnight.

```yaml
# cronjob.yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: CronJob
metadata:
  name: blackbox
spec:
  schedule: "@daily"
  jobTemplate:
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
            - name: blackbox
              image: lemonsaurus/blackbox
              imagePullPolicy: Always
              envFrom:
                - secretRef:
                    name: blackbox-secrets
              # Tell blackbox where to find the config file.
              env:
              - name: BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH
                value: "/blackbox/config_file/blackbox.yaml"
              volumeMounts:
                # Take care not to mount this in the root folder!
                # That will replace everything in the root folder with
                # the contents of this volume, which sucks.
                - mountPath: /blackbox/config_file
                  name: blackbox-config
          volumes:
            - name: blackbox-config
              configMap:
                name: blackbox-config
          restartPolicy: OnFailure
      backoffLimit: 3
```

# Configuration

`blackbox` configuration is easy. You simply create a yaml
file, `blackbox.yaml`, which contains something like this:

See below for specific configuration information for each handler.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres: # Database type 
    main_postgres: # Database identifier
      # Configuration (see below for further information on specific databases)
      username: username
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port

      # Optionally specify storage and notifiers to use
      # You can specify them by type or identifier
      # Use a string for a single specifier, a list for multiple specifiers
      storage_providers:
        - s3
        - secondary_dropbox
      notifiers: slack

  redis:
    main_redis:
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port
      # No specified storage and notifiers, so all storage and notifiers are used

storage:
  s3: # Storage type
    main_s3: # Storage identifier
      bucket: bucket
      endpoint: s3.endpoint.com
    secondary_s3:
      bucket: bucket
      endpoint: s3.another_endpoint.com
  dropbox:
    main_dropbox:
      access_token: XXXXXXXXXXX
    secondary_dropbox:
      access_token: XXXXXXXXXXX

notifiers:
  discord: # Notifier type
    main_discord: # Notifier identifier
      webhook: https://discord.com/api/webhooks/797541821394714674/lzRM9DFggtfHZXGJTz3yE-MrYJ-4O-0AbdQg3uV2x4vFbu7HTHY2Njq8cx8oyMg0T3Wk
  slack:
    main_slack:
      webhook: https://hooks.slack.com/services/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

retention_days: 7
```

Blackbox will look for this file in the root folder by default, however you can
provide an alternative config file path by creating an environment variable
called `BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH`, and set it to the absolute path of the file.

```sh
export BLACKBOX_CONFIG_PATH=/var/my/favorite/fruit/blackbox.yaml
```

You can also specify the location of this file when using the `blackbox` cli
command.

```sh
blackbox --config=/path/to/blackbox.yaml
```

## Environment Variables

The `blackbox.yaml` will ✨ **magically interpolate** ✨ any environment
variables that exist in the environment where `blackbox` is running. This is
very useful if you want to keep your secrets in environment variables, instead
of keeping them in the config file in plaintext.

#### Example

Imagine your current config looks like this, but you want to move the username
and password into environment variables.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: lemonsaurus
      password: security-is-overrated
      host: localhost
      port: 5432
```

So we'll create two environment variables like these:

```sh
export POSTGRES_USERNAME=lemonsaurus
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=security-is-overrated
```

And now we can make use of these environment variables by using double curly
brackets, like this:

```yaml
databases:
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: { { POSTGRES_USERNAME } }
      password: { { POSTGRES_PASSWORD } }
      host: localhost
      port: 5432
```

## Databases

Right now, this app supports **MongoDB**, **PostgreSQL 7.0 or higher**, **MariaDB**, **Redis** and **local storage archiving**. If
you need support for an additional database, consider opening a pull request to
add a new database handler.

To configure databases, add a section with this format:

```yaml
databases:
  database_type:
    # More than one of each database type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  database_type:
    ...
```

See below for the specific database types available and fields required.
Identifiers can be any string of your choosing.

### MongoDB

- **Database Type**: `mongodb`
- **Required fields**: `connection_string`
- The `connection_string` field is in the
  format `mongodb://username:password@host:port`
- To restore from the backup,
  use `mongorestore --gzip --archive=/path/to/backup.archive`

```yaml
  mongodb:
    main_mongo:
      connection_string: "mongodb://blackbox:blackbox@mongo:27017"
```

### PostgreSQL

- **Database Type**: `postgres`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `psql -f /path/to/backup.sql`

```yaml
  postgres:
    main_postgres:
      username: blackbox
      password: blackbox
      host: postgres
      port: "5432"
```

### MariaDB

- **Database Type**: `mariadb`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `mysql -u <user> -p < db_backup.sql`

```yaml
  mariadb:
    main_mariadb:
      username: root
      password: example
      host: maria
      port: "3306"
```

### MySQL

- **Database Type**: `mysql`
- **Required fields**: `username`, `password`, `host`, `port`
- To restore from the backup, use `mysql -u <user> -p < db_backup.sql`

```yaml
  mysql:
    main_mysql:
      username: root
      password: example
      host: mysql
      port: "3306"
```

### Redis

- **Database Type**: `redis`
- **Required fields**: `password`, `host`, `port`

```yaml
  redis:
    main_redis:
      password: blackbox
      host: redis
      port: "6379"
```

### Local storage

- **Database type**: `localstorage`
- **Required field**: `path`
- **Optional field**: `compression_level`
- The compression level must be an integer between 0 and 9.
- The archive will contain the full structure, starting from the root folder.

```yaml
  localstorage:
    main_localstorage:
      path: /path/to/folder
      compression_level: 7
```

#### To restore from the backup

- Stop Redis server.
- Turn off `appendonly` mode in Redis configuration (set to `no`).
- Copy backup file to Redis working directory (`dir` in configuration) with
  name that is defined in configuration key `dbfilename`.
- Set backup permissions.

```
sudo chown redis:redis <path-to-redis-dump-file>
sudo chmod 660 <path-to-redis-dump-file>
```

- Start Redis server.

If you want to re-enable `appendonly`:

- Login with `redis-cli`.
- Run `BGREWRITEAOF`.
- Exit from Redis CLI (with `exit`).
- Stop Redis server.
- Set `appendonly` to `yes` in Redis configuration.
- Start Redis server.

### Specify Storage providers and Notifiers for each Database

To specify specific storage providers or notifiers for databases, add the
fields `storage_providers` and `notifiers` under each database entry. The entry
can be a list or a string.

```yaml
databases:
  postgres: # Database type 
    main_postgres: # Database identifier
      username: username
      password: password
      host: host
      port: port

      storage_providers:
        - s3
        - secondary_dropbox
      notifiers: slack
```

The above example will backup `main_postgres` to every `s3` storage provider
configured, as well as the storage provider with the
identifier `secondary_dropbox`. Then, only the `slack` notifier gets notified.

These fields are optional. If not given, all storage providers and all
notifiers will be used.

## Storage providers

**Blackbox** can work with different storage providers to save your logs and
backups - usually so that you can automatically store them in the cloud. Right
now we support **S3** and **Dropbox**.

To configure storage providers, add a section with this format:

```yaml
storage:
  storage_type:
    # More than one of each storage provider type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  storage_type:
    ...
```

### S3

We support any S3 object storage bucket, whether it's from **AWS**, **Linode**
, **DigitalOcean**, **Scaleway**, or another S3-compatible object storage
provider.

**Blackbox** will respect the `retention_days` configuration setting and delete
older files from the S3 storage. Please note that if you have a bucket
expiration policy on your storage, **blackbox** will not do anything to disable
it. So, for example, if your bucket expiration policy is 12 hours and blackbox
is set to 7 `retention_days`, then your backups are all gonna be deleted after
12 hours unless you disable your policy.

#### S3 configuration

- **Storage Type**: `s3`
- **Required fields**: `bucket`, `endpoint`
- **Optional fields**: `aws_access_key_id`, `aws_secret_access_key`
- The `endpoint` field can look something like
  this: `s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com`

#### Credentials

To upload stuff to S3, you'll need credentials. Your **AWS credentials** can be
provided in several ways. This is the order in which blackbox looks for them:

- First, we look for the optional fields in the s3 configuration,
  called `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key`.
- If these are not found, we'll check if the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
  and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` environment variables are declared in the local
  environment where Blackbox is running.
- If we can't find these, we'll look for an `.aws/config` file in the local
  environment.
- NOTE: If the bucket is public, no credentials are necessary.

### Dropbox

- **Storage Type**: `dropbox`
- **Required fields**: `access_token`
- **Optional fields**: `upload_directory`

The Dropbox storage handler needs a user access token in order to work. To get
one, do the following:

- Create a Dropbox account (if you don't already have one).
- Go to https://dropbox.com/developers
- Create a new application with App Folder access. **Do not give it full
  access**, as this may have dangerous, destructive consequences if configured
  incorrectly.

You can also define a custom location (root is App Folder) using the
`upload_directory` optional parameter. This **should** begin with slash and 
**must** end with slash. Default is root.

### Google Drive

- **Storage Type**: `googledrive`
- **Required fields**: `refresh_token, client_id, client_secret`
- **Optional fields**: `upload_directory`

The Google Drive storage handler needs a refresh token, client ID, and client secret in order to work. To get
these, do the following:

- Create a Google account (if you don't already have one).
- Go to https://console.cloud.google.com
- Create a project
- In the OAuth Overview page, click Get Started
- Follow the prompts and fill out the presented forms
- When you're finished, go to the Clients tab, and click Create Client
- Select Web Application for Application Type
- The required scopes are: `/auth/drive.file` and `/auth/drive.appdata`
- Click your newly created client to view the client ID and secret
- Use your client ID and secret to obtain a refresh token using the tool of your choice, such as Postman
- Make sure you add your own email as a user in the Audience tab

If you decide to use Postman to obtain your refresh token:

- Ensure you set the authorized redirect URI to `https://oauth.pstmn.io/v1/callback` in your Google client configuration
- Set the `Auth URL` to `https://accounts.google.com/o/oauth2/v2/auth?access_type=offline&prompt=consent` in Postman to ensure Google responds with a refresh token, and not only an access token
- Read the [Postman authorization docs](https://learning.postman.com/docs/sending-requests/authorization/authorization/)

You can define a custom location in which to store backups (the default is the root folder) using the
`upload_directory` optional parameter. This should be in the format `Cool/Example`. Any folders in the path
that do not already exist will be created for you.

## Notifiers

`blackbox` also implements different _notifiers_, which is how it reports the
result of one of its jobs to you. Right now we only support the below listed notifiers, 
but if you need a specific notifier, feel free to open an issue.

To configure notifiers, add a section with this format:

```yaml
notifiers:
  notifier_type:
    # More than one of each notifier type can be configured
    identifier_1:
      field: value
    identifier_2:
      field: value
  notifier_type:
    ...
```

### Discord

- **Notifier Type**: `discord`
- **Required fields**: `webhook`
- The `webhook` field usually looks
  like `https://discord.com/api/webhooks/797541821394714674/lzRM9DFggtfHZXGJTz3yE-MrYJ-4O-0AbdQg3uV2x4vFbu7HTHY2Njq8cx8oyMg0T3Wk`
- We also support `ptb.discord.com` and `canary.discord.com` webhooks.

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_discord.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_discord_2.png)

### Slack

- **Notifier Type**: `slack`
- **Required fields**: `webhook`
- The `webhook` field usually looks
  like `https://hooks.slack.com/services/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXX/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX`

Slack notifiers have 2 styles: legacy attachment (default) and modern Block Kit
version. To enable Block Kit version, set the optional field `use_block_kit` to
anything.

Default:

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_default_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_default_fail.png)

Modern:

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_modern_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_slack_modern_fail.png)


### Telegram

- **Notifier Type**: `telegram`
- **Required fields**: `token`, `chat_id`
- YAML will look like this:
```notifiers:
  telegram:
    telegram_1:
      token: {{ TELEGRAM_TOKEN }}
      chat_id: {{ TELEGRAM_CHAT_ID }}
```
- You can create a bot and get a bot token using the `BotFather` account in Telegram. Follow [these instructions](https://core.telegram.org/bots#6-botfather).
- You can find your `chat_id` by using the `userinfobot` account in Telegram. Just `/start` the bot.
- Do not forget to `/start` your own bot to grant sending permissions.

![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_telegram_success.png)
![blackbox](https://github.com/lemonsaurus/blackbox/raw/main/img/blackbox_telegram_fail.png)


### Json
- **Notifier Type**: `json`
- **Required fields**: `url`
- YAML will look like this:
```notifiers:
  json:
    json_1:
      url: https://mydomain.com/api/blackbox-notifications
```

**Note**: All notifications are sent as a `POST` request because the data will live within the request's body.

The body of the HTTP request will look like this

```json
{
    "backup-data": [
        {
            "source": "main_postgres",
            "success": true,
            "output": "",
            "backup": [
                {
                    "name": "main_dropbox",
                    "success": true
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```


## Rotation

By default, `blackbox` will automatically remove all backup files older than 7
days in the folder you configure for your storage provider. To determine if
something is a backup file or not, it will use a regex pattern that corresponds
with the default file it saves, for
example `blackbox-postgres-backup-11-12-2020.sql`.

You can configure the number of days before rotating by altering
the `retention_days` parameter in `blackbox.yaml`.


## Cooldown

By default, `blackbox` will send all notification at every backup attempt. 
You can specify a `cooldown` period in `blackbox.yaml` during which all notifications will be muted.
This option will not mute failed backups.

### Example usage

```yaml
cooldown: 120s
```
```yaml
cooldown: 3 hours
```
```yaml
cooldown: 2 days 4 hours
```
```yaml
cooldown: 4h 32M 16s
```
